Compensation Act 2006 Skip to main content Skip to navigation legislation.gov.uk https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk Cymraeg Home Explore our collections Research tools Help and guidance What's new About us Search Legislation Search Legislation Title: (or keywords in the title) Year: Number: Type: All UK Legislation (excluding originating from the EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation (including originating from EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU that is amended by the UK -------------------------------------------- All Primary Legislation UK Public General Acts UK Local Acts UK Private and Personal Acts Acts of the Scottish Parliament Acts of Senedd Cymru Acts of the National Assembly for Wales Measures of the National Assembly for Wales Church Measures Acts of the Northern Ireland Assembly Acts of the Old Scottish Parliament Acts of the English Parliament Acts of the Old Irish Parliament Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain Local Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain Private and Personal Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain Northern Ireland Orders in Council Measures of the Northern Ireland Assembly Acts of the Northern Ireland Parliament -------------------------------------------- All Secondary Legislation UK Statutory Instruments Welsh Statutory Instruments Scottish Statutory Instruments Northern Ireland Statutory Rules Church Instruments UK Ministerial Directions UK Ministerial Orders UK Statutory Rules and Orders Northern Ireland Statutory Rules and Orders -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU Regulations originating from the EU Regulations originating from the EU that are amended by the UK Decisions originating from the EU Decisions originating from the EU that are amended by the UK Directives originating from the EU European Union Treaties -------------------------------------------- All Draft Legislation UK Draft Statutory Instruments Scottish Draft Statutory Instruments Northern Ireland Draft Statutory Rules -------------------------------------------- All Impact Assessments UK Impact Assessments Search Advanced Search Compensation Act 2006 You are here: UK Public General Acts 2006 c. 29 Part 1 Section 3 Table of Contents Content Explanatory Notes More Resources Previous: Provision Next: Provision Plain View Print Options What Version Latest available (Revised) Original (As enacted) Advanced Features Show Geographical Extent (e.g. E ngland, W ales, S cotland and N orthern I reland) Show Timeline of Changes Opening Options Open whole Act Open Act without Schedules Open Schedules only More Resources Original: King's Printer Version View more Changes over time for: Section 3 Alternative versions: 25/07/2006 - Amendment 01/04/2013 - Amendment Changes to legislation: Compensation Act 2006, Section 3 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 May 2026. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. Changes to Legislation Revised legislation carried on this site may not be fully up to date. Changes and effects are recorded by our editorial team in lists which can be found in the ‘Changes to Legislation’ area. Where those effects have yet to be applied to the text of the legislation by the editorial team they are also listed alongside the legislation in the affected provisions. Use the ‘more’ link to open the changes and effects relevant to the provision you are viewing. View outstanding changes Changes and effects yet to be applied to Section 3: s. 4(2A) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 2(2) s. 5(1A) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 3(2) s. 5(11) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 3(9) s. 6(3A) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 4 s. 8(9) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 6(3) s. 9(2A) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 7 Changes and effects yet to be applied to the whole Act associated Parts and Chapters: Whole provisions yet to be inserted into this Act (including any effects on those provisions): s. 4(2A) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 2(2) s. 5(1A) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 3(2) s. 5(11) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 3(9) s. 6(3A) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 4 s. 8(9) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 6(3) s. 9(2A) inserted by 2007 c. 29 Sch. 19 para. 7 3 Mesothelioma: damages U.K. This section has no associated Explanatory Notes (1) This section applies where— (a) a person (“the responsible person”) has negligently or in breach of statutory duty caused or permitted another person (“the victim”) to be exposed to asbestos, (b) the victim has contracted mesothelioma as a result of exposure to asbestos, (c) because of the nature of mesothelioma and the state of medical science, it is not possible to determine with certainty whether it was the exposure mentioned in paragraph (a) or another exposure which caused the victim to become ill, and (d) the responsible person is liable in tort, by virtue of the exposure mentioned in paragraph (a), in connection with damage caused to the victim by the disease (whether by reason of having materially increased a risk or for any other reason). (2) The responsible person shall be liable— (a) in respect of the whole of the damage caused to the victim by the disease (irrespective of whether the victim was also exposed to asbestos— (i) other than by the responsible person, whether or not in circumstances in which another person has liability in tort, or (ii) by the responsible person in circumstances in which he has no liability in tort), and (b) jointly and severally with any other responsible person. (3) Subsection (2) does not prevent— (a) one responsible person from claiming a contribution from another, or (b) a finding of contributory negligence. (4) In determining the extent of contributions of different responsible persons in accordance with subsection (3)(a), a court shall have regard to the relative lengths of the periods of exposure for which each was responsible; but this subsection shall not apply— (a) if or to the extent that responsible persons agree to apportion responsibility amongst themselves on some other basis, or (b) if or to the extent that the court thinks that another basis for determining contributions is more appropriate in the circumstances of a particular case. (5) In subsection (1) the reference to causing or permitting a person to be exposed to asbestos includes a reference to failing to protect a person from exposure to asbestos. (6) In the application of this section to Scotland— (a) a reference to tort shall be taken as a reference to delict, and (b) a reference to a court shall be taken to include a reference to a jury. (7) The Treasury may make regulations about the provision of compensation to a responsible person where— (a) he claims, or would claim, a contribution from another responsible person in accordance with subsection (3)(a), but (b) he is unable or likely to be unable to obtain the contribution, because an insurer of the other responsible person is unable or likely to be unable to satisfy the claim for a contribution. (8) The regulations may, in particular— F1 (a) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (b) replicate or apply (with or without modification) a transitional compensation provision; (c) provide for a specified person to assess and pay compensation; (d) provide for expenses incurred (including the payment of compensation) to be met out of levies collected in accordance with section 213(3)(b) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (c. 8) (the Financial Services Compensation Scheme); (e) modify the effect of a transitional compensation provision; (f) enable the [ F2 Financial Conduct Authority or the Prudential Regulation Authority ] to amend the Financial Services Compensation Scheme; (g) modify the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 in its application to an amendment pursuant to paragraph (f); (h) make, or require the making of, provision for the making of a claim by a responsible person for compensation whether or not he has already satisfied claims in tort against him; (i) make, or require the making of, provision which has effect in relation to claims for contributions made on or after the date on which this Act is passed. F3 (9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (10) In subsections (7) and (8)— (a) a reference to a responsible person includes a reference to an insurer of a responsible person, and (b) “ transitional compensation provision ” means a provision of an enactment which is made under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 and— (i) preserves the effect of the Policyholders Protection Act 1975 (c. 75), or (ii) applies the Financial Services Compensation Scheme in relation to matters arising before its establishment. (11) Regulations under subsection (7)— (a) may include consequential or incidental provision, (b) may make provision which has effect generally or only in relation to specified cases or circumstances, (c) may make different provision for different cases or circumstances, (d) shall be made by statutory instrument, and (e) may not be made unless a draft has been laid before and approved by resolution of each House of Parliament. Textual Amendments F1 S. 3(8)(a) omitted (1.4.2013) by virtue of Financial Services Act 2012 (c. 21) , s. 122(3) , Sch. 18 para. 109(2)(a) (with Sch. 20 ); S.I. 2013/423 , art. 3 , Sch. F2 Words in s. 3(8)(f) substituted (1.4.2013) by Financial Services Act 2012 (c. 21) , s. 122(3) , Sch. 18 para. 109(2)(b) (with Sch. 20 ); S.I. 2013/423 , art. 3 , Sch. F3 S. 3(9) omitted (1.4.2013) by virtue of Financial Services Act 2012 (c. 21) , s. 122(3) , Sch. 18 para. 109(3) (with Sch. 20 ); S.I. 2013/423 , art. 3 , Sch. Previous: Provision Next: Provision Back to top Options/Help Print Options Print The Whole Act PDF The Whole Act Web page The Whole Act Print The Whole Part PDF The Whole Part Web page The Whole Part Print This Section only PDF This Section only Web page This Section only Legislation is available in different versions: Latest Available (revised): The latest available updated version of the legislation incorporating changes made by subsequent legislation and applied by our editorial team. Changes we have not yet applied to the text, can be found in the ‘Changes to Legislation’ area. Original (As Enacted or Made): The original version of the legislation as it stood when it was enacted or made. No changes have been applied to the text. See additional information alongside the content Geographical Extent: Indicates the geographical area that this provision applies to. For further information see ‘Frequently Asked Questions’. Show Timeline of Changes: See how this legislation has or could change over time. Turning this feature on will show extra navigation options to go to these specific points in time. Return to the latest available version by using the controls above in the What Version box. Opening Options Different options to open legislation in order to view more content on screen at once Explanatory Notes Text created by the government department responsible for the subject matter of the Act to explain what the Act sets out to achieve and to make the Act accessible to readers who are not legally qualified. Explanatory Notes were introduced in 1999 and accompany all Public Acts except Appropriation, Consolidated Fund, Finance and Consolidation Acts. More Resources Access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item from this tab. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include: the original print PDF of the as enacted version that was used for the print copy lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item confers power and blanket amendment details all formats of all associated documents correction slips links to related legislation and further information resources Timeline of Changes This timeline shows the different points in time where a change occurred. The dates will coincide with the earliest date on which the change (e.g an insertion, a repeal or a substitution) that was applied came into force. The first date in the timeline will usually be the earliest date when the provision came into force. In some cases the first date is 01/02/1991 (or for Northern Ireland legislation 01/01/2006). This date is our basedate. No versions before this date are available. For further information see the Editorial Practice Guide and Glossary under Help. More Resources Use this menu to access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include: the original print PDF of the as enacted version that was used for the print copy correction slips Click 'View More' or select 'More Resources' tab for additional information including: lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item confers power and blanket amendment details all formats of all associated documents links to related legislation and further information resources The data on this page is available in the alternative data formats listed: HTML5 alternative version HTML snippet alternative version PDF alternative version XML alternative version Akoma Ntoso alternative version HTML RDFa alternative version RDF/XML alternative version New site design Help About us Site map Accessibility Contact us Privacy notice Cookies All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated . This site additionally contains content derived from EUR-Lex, reused under the terms of the Commission Decision 2011/833/EU on the reuse of documents from the EU institutions. For more information see the EUR-Lex public statement on re-use . © Crown and database right